We're here with Thomas John,
a Quantitative Portfolio Manager,
to talk about careers and job interviews for quant roles.
So Thomas, how can someone start a career in the finance,
asset management, or banking?
Is the process more difficult that we're not coming
straight out of a brand name university or graduate school?
From what I've observed coming from a name brand institution
is less important for a full-time jobs than for internships,
which are limited in number.
Cold resume submissions online for
listed openings actually does work contrary to what some people believe.
I myself and others I know have received job offers in this way.
Remember that your resume always does get looked at.
If you know someone at the firm,
anyone who can send your resume to HR or the hiring manager,
that will also help.
This might be more necessary if your background is not an obvious match.
But don't take wild shots at what you think is your dream job.
First, see if you would be a useful hire to the role,
regardless of whether that is obvious to others or you have some convincing to do.
Only if you're self-convinced,
try to make an attempt at it.
Otherwise, it's going to be problematic for HR or
your internal contact to make that connection to the hiring manager.
Another channel is to simply start in one area of
that firm that may be more suited to your current background,
and then move internally within the firm over the years into other roles.
For example, contrary to myths about having to start in the right vertical,
a number of traders have started their careers in the IT department of the firm.
Cool. Could you say something about networking?
Which organizations or events should we attend?
My brief advice on networking is to do good work where you are,
and be a good team member there.
In due course, your colleagues will be able to speak for your worth.
This is true even if you are in school.
The people who can know your work and your character are your classmates and professors.
We should let go of ideas that networking is some distinct activity that you do,
and that its purpose is to get you the next job or to get someone to help you.
Rather, it is about working together on things.
People can see your competencies,
and likewise, you can see theirs.
So focus on building competence and contributing to your team.
Well, some events such as job fairs consist
of people explicitly coming there looking for people to hire.
There's no big trick to networking there.
If you are interested in the position,
let the person know of your interests,
and highlight your skills,
and be able to demonstrate your competence.
So you really need to have that competence first before you show up at these events.
There are other networking events like meet-ups in the TechSpace, for example,
where people interested in hiring do show up sometimes.
In general though, connections formed with strangers at events are weaker
than natural connections with people with whom you share a common bond already.
You know them from school or work,
or volunteering together, playing on the same sports team, etc.
Great. What does a typical job interview look like?
First, share your story.
Really you talking about what makes you a good candidate.
There are also quant problems;
logic, probability, programming, mathematics.
These are intended to test your background,
see how good you are on your feet with a new problem,
check how good your communication skills are,
and also to check if you can work with someone else on a problem.
The interviewer gives you a chance to ask questions to her or him.
So definitely, go for it and ask them questions.
It's a two-way process and you want to know if this is the group you want to work for.
I also have a practical suggestion,
take an energy bar or two with you on the interview day.
If for some reasons,
such as market swings on the day,
schedules get messed up and you miss lunch,
you'll still have your snacks and we'll be glad
you aren't doing the rest of the interviews on an empty stomach.
What are some shortcomings about the current hiring process?
Interviews can be too short in time.
The process has been notorious for false negatives,
that is, turning away good candidates.
Ideally, firms would watch every junior hire over
a few months as an intern and only then higher.
In fact, this is the biggest hiring pipeline for many firms on Wall Street.
But that may not always be practical,
especially for small firms.
Great. Thanks, Thomas, for your advice.
You're welcome.